[anneal] Add more thorough agent documentation (#3489)
google/zerocopy: anneal/AGENTS.md

Author: Recording a general observation discussed w/ @mdittmer: There is a lot of the current state of the repo encoded in this and other agent files that risks bit rotting or drifting. We should consider how much of that could be easily reconstructed by either reading the code directly or by reading documentation which lives "closer" to the code and is more likely to be kept up to date.

also follow the more specific `v1/AGENTS.md`.

Anneal V2 is a clean-room, ground-up rewrite and redesign. V1 is an
experimental prototype from which we draw evidence and lessons; it is not a
default architecture, specification language, or user interface for V2. Copy
from it when a choice has been reconsidered and remains appropriate, not merely
because code already exists.

## Mission

Anneal's long-term goal is to let Rust users verify arbitrarily subtle
correctness properties for arbitrary Rust codebases. This requires a general
framework for user-defined properties and unusually strong support for the
memory-safety reasoning needed by unsafe-heavy systems code.

Soundness is special and non-negotiable. Rust compilers and Anneal's source
models need not preserve the behavior of a program after undefined behavior.
Anneal must therefore establish the soundness conditions on which its own
model fidelity depends. Functional correctness, panic freedom, protocol
correctness, resource bounds, and other properties may be selected or defined
by users; they may depend on soundness and on one another.

Read [the design principles](docs/design/principles.md) for the project's value

> function and [the settled requirements](docs/design/settled-requirements.md) for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read [the design principles](docs/design/principles.md) for principles that guide all
design decisions and
[the settled requirements](docs/design/settled-requirements.md) for
```

the constraints every design must satisfy.

## Required reading

When entering from an unfamiliar checkout or worktree, first use the
[agent-corpus preflight](docs/agent-corpus.md) to confirm that you have found
Anneal V2 rather than V1 or a sibling worktree.

Before making a design change, read:

1. The [documentation map](docs/README.md) and
   [glossary](docs/glossary.md).
2. [Design principles](docs/design/principles.md).
3. [Settled requirements](docs/design/settled-requirements.md).
4. The [accepted-decision index](docs/design/decisions/README.md) and each
   accepted decision relevant to the change.
5. [Verification model](docs/design/verification-model.md),

>    [verification subject and result identity](docs/design/verification-artifact.md), and

Reviewer: The link text here doesn't make sense to me. Is there a different way of wording what is contained in the linked document?

[Aeneas and Charon](docs/reference/aeneas-and-charon.md). For a question shaped
by V1, read [V1 lessons](docs/history/v1-lessons.md) and then inspect the V1
implementation itself.

## How to make judgment calls

Apply these rules together rather than as a rigid total ordering:

- Preserve soundness. Do not gain simplicity, coverage, or convenience by
  weakening a soundness obligation or silently adding trust.
- Preserve semantic fidelity. A simple model is valuable only while it
  faithfully supports the claim Anneal makes. Resource ownership, provenance,
  initialization, concurrency protocols, or effects must not become freely
  duplicable facts when doing so could invalidate soundness.
- Prefer local, compositional reasoning. The key scalability property is that
  an implementation can be checked against an abstraction boundary and then
  used without re-examining the whole program.
- Prefer the simplest faithful abstraction. Pure functional contracts are
  excellent where they capture the interface; resource- or effect-aware
  interfaces are required where purity would discard soundness-relevant facts.
- Make trust explicit and auditable. A trusted leaf can be a legitimate

>   engineering boundary; a hidden assumption or uncovered operation cannot.

Reviewer: "uncovered" has a conventional meaning that is not what we intend; maybe more verbose is better? Something like "... or an operation that is ignored or not covered by proof reasoning logic"?

- Build on maintained Lean, Aeneas, and Charon abstractions when they fit.
  Reinvention is permitted, but should carry a concrete benefit that outweighs

>   duplicated semantics and maintenance.

Reviewer: Should we specifically ask agents to flag abstractions that could be upstreamed to Lean, Aeneas, and/or Charon?

Author: Agreed. I'm not sure where best to put this guidance.

- Prefer robust programmatic interfaces over textual patching. Upstream changes
  to Aeneas, Charon, Lean libraries, and Rust itself are in scope. Choose
  upstream or downstream ownership case by case, including the burden placed on
  collaborators.
- Optimize for useful coverage, evolvability, debuggability, and eventual use
  by ordinary Rust engineers. AI assistance is expected to help, but may not be
  used to excuse an incoherent or unauditable interface.
- Support incremental adoption without confusing an assumption with a proof.
  Prose safety justifications and incomplete proofs must remain visible in the
  resulting trust or coverage report.
- Fail closed relative to the exact claim and command mode being reported.
  Unsupported semantics, missing coverage, or an undischarged obligation may
  never produce an unconditional verification claim. An explicitly named
  incremental mode may report a weaker conditional result only when every
  assumption and incomplete obligation is part of that result; command names
  and exit policies remain open.

When principles conflict, state the conflict and justify the tradeoff in those

> terms. Do not invent a permanent priority ordering from one local decision.

Reviewer: Should some or all of this live in the principles documentation instead?

## Settled constraints and open designs

The documentation taxonomy is defined in [docs/README.md](docs/README.md).
In brief:

- `docs/design/` states the normative intent.
- Accepted records in `docs/design/decisions/` capture settled choices and
  their rationale.
- `docs/design/open-questions/` records constraints, candidates, and evidence,
  not decisions.
- `docs/reference/` describes the checked-in implementation and may change as
  the code changes.

> - `docs/history/` is evidence, not authority.

Reviewer: Is this valuable if agents are going to go read the linked README.md that says as much anyway?

Do not resolve an open question incidentally in implementation code. Before a
change commits the project to an answer, obtain explicit agreement from the
project authors. With that agreement, add or update an accepted decision record
and reconcile the normative documents. Without it, keep the record proposed,
describe the implementation as an experiment, or stop and surface the choice.

> If documents conflict, surface the conflict instead of silently selecting the

Reviewer: There is a technical notion of "conflict" that we don't want to mistakenly imply here. Maybe something like "the decisions in different documents" or "the proposals in different documents" or something?

Author: Maybe "disagree"?

convenient text.

In particular, the following remain open unless an accepted decision says
otherwise:

- the final property/outcome taxonomy;
- whether proof obligations are encoded as Lean arguments or sidecar theorems;
- how Anneal's property tracking builds on or parallels Rust's `unsafe`
  machinery;
- the annotation and proof-authoring syntax;
- the precise boundary among Anneal, Aeneas, Charon, and rustc;

> - the exact audit-ledger schema and success modes of `cargo anneal verify`.

Reviewer: This is likely to change. Should we "trust the content of `docs/design/open-questions`" (or whatever the path is) rather than put a one-off list here?

Do not describe a candidate from an issue, PR, V1, or an open-question document
as settled.

## Current implementation

The checked-in V2 executable currently provides toolchain setup scaffolding;
much of the intended verification pipeline is not yet present on this branch.
Open and stacked PRs may contain additional implementation, but are not the
source of truth for the checked-in tree. See
[current architecture](docs/reference/current-architecture.md).

From the repository root, useful checks are:

```bash
cargo test --locked --manifest-path anneal/Cargo.toml
cargo fmt --check --manifest-path anneal/Cargo.toml --all
PYTHONDONTWRITEBYTECODE=1 python3 -m unittest discover -s anneal/tests -p 'test_*.py'
bash anneal/check-flake-eval.sh
```

Tests behind the `exocrate_tests` feature expect CI to place a prebuilt archive
at `anneal/target/anneal-exocrate.tar.zst`.

V1 has different commands and a different architecture. Follow

> `anneal/v1/AGENTS.md` when working there.

Reviewer: I have observed that agents are pretty good t deducing "useful checks" (including adjustments needed to environment, features, etc. when documentation is wrong). Between that, and my bias against putting something in here that can bitrot or _drift_ relative to more authoritative sources liek `docs/design/**`, I wonder whether we should omit this. If an agent needs to know the current state, they should look at git history, open issues, open PRs, and documents. I would suggest either omitting this section, or replacing it with a suggestion stating "how to find current state/conventions" instead of what they are.
